# NFS File Sharing By Hash URL 

- Status: proposed
- Type: new feature
- Related components: SAFE Beaker Browser, safe-js, safe_core
- Start Date: 22-11-2016
- Discussion: (Preliminary to be replaced) - [File sharing at the level of safe: URLs](https://forum.safedev.org/t/file-sharing-at-the-level-of-safe-urls/288?u=happybeing) 
- Supersedes: n/a
- Superseded by: n/a


## Summary

Provide a way to obtain a "safe:" URL based on the file hash (network address) for any file stored using SAFE NFS, and so is not reliant on a public ID or SAFE DNS. Such a *SAFE Hash URL* would be valid to use as part of a normal HTML page or as a file download link in SAFE Beaker Browser.

This would allow, for example:

- an image captured by a SAFE web app and stored in a user's SAFE NFS storage, to be loaded into the DOM of the app, or an HTML document generated by the app, and displayed within by the browser as part of the app UI or saved HTML.

- a *Share file...* command in any app, which offers up a SAFE Hash URL for an arbitrary file (any file stored in their shared drive). This can be sent to anyone who, provided the file is public, could then access the image with just a SAFE web browser.  Private files could also be accessed this way but only by the authorised owner, as part of their browser history, or as quick access links in other applications or documents.

An important feature is avoiding the need for anything other than a standard SAFE Browser, such as a special file sharing app, or for the user to have made a public ID and service for the purpose of sharing files (see *Alternatives*).


## Conventions
- The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).


## Motivation

Easy sharing of files via web links is one of the "killer" features of the current web and it is important for SAFE to avoid losing expected and valuable functionality in order to encourage and accelerate adoption. This proposal in fact would exceed the current functionality (e.g. by making links permanent) and be easier to use because all SAFE users will already have everything they need (no need to sign up to a separate cloud service, and no need to upload any file once stored on SAFE NFS).

Without this, the SAFE NFS user would need to use a specialist file sharing application to share a file, and files accessed through such links would be less secure, hard to trust or guarantee permanence.

An additional aim is to make it easy for SAFE web apps to create content, save it to the network, and to have a flexible and easy to use API for displaying it within the application. Native applications will also benefit from easier ways to share data they generate with users (e.g. as download links) or which is easily sent to other applications or web apps, using a standard that every application can easily support.

Providing access to SAFE files, without requiring publication via SAFE DNS, makes it easy to port existing apps, or for someone who already knows how to create and load files on a traditional web server to offer this functionality in new apps. Thus we can expect many apps to take advantage of these widely expected features, similar to, but more functional and easier to use than the current web. The guaranteed permanence of download links will no doubt also lead to the creation of new and innovative kinds of application.


## Required Functionality

1) File Sharing: users will find it useful if they can share files without first creating a public id and service. They would need to have a way of identifying the file to be shared and obtaining a URL for it, which would require an application to provide a suitable URL for a given file. This RFC recommends extending the API so that applications can do this, but doesn't consider any such applications or how they work.

2) Apps That Create Files: if a web app creates a file it may wish to present the file by embedding a link to it within the HTML of the app - by creating a URL for the file and embedding a link to it in the DOM. For example, an application might capture images using the webcam, store these on the network, and display them within the app by embedding image links within its HTML. To do this using SAFE NFS would be difficult, either needing a public ID and service to be created (probably one per such application). Alternatively the app have to implement a way to read files stored on SAFE NFS and then render them directly on the page, which is difficult and would make it harder for the developer to take advantage of this functionality, and lose the advantages of doing this directly in HTML.


## Detailed design

We need a format of safe: URL which SAFE Beaker (and other compatible browsers) can recognise and use to access content stored on SAFE network without reference to a SAFE public ID. Each file stored on SAFE network is addressed using a cryptographic hash, so we can use that, but we need to consider different kinds of file and how to provide expected and appropriate behaviour, depending on how the file is stored (e.g. as immutable data, mutable data, key-value store etc.), how it is identified by the user (e.g. via a directory listing obtained from SAFE NFS), and the type of the file (e.g. text, PDF, HTML, binary, video etc.).

This is tricky - to cover all cases with sensible defaults so the following is a proposal as a starting point which will probably be subject to discussion and revision.

### SAFE Web URL Structure

To recap existing functionality, a `safe:` website URL is similar to a standard web URL, but always begins with `safe:` rather than `http` or `https`. This link protocol indicates a resource located on the SAFE network. For a website published on SAFE network, we create a public ID and service using SAFE NFS, and this allows SAFE Beaker to interpret URLs of the following form:

In the following, square brackets denote an optional component. So `[service.]publicid` means either a value denoting a `service` followed by a '.' followed by a value denoting a `publicid`, or just a value denoting a `publicid`.

	`safe://[service.]publicid[/filepath]`

`service` is optional, and defaults to `www`

`filepath` is also optional, and if service is ommitted or given as `www`, the filepath defaults to `index.html`

So for example, the following URLs would all access the same file assuming it exists in a directory that has been published at the given service and public ID:


	`safe://rfcs`
	`safe://www.rfcs`
	`safe://rfcs/index.html`
	`safe://www.rfcs/index.html`


All the above is existing functionality, so the format of *SAFE Hash URLs* must always be distinguishable from this.

### SAFE Hash URL Structure

SAFE Beaker must be able to recognise a Hash URL, parse it, and determine what method to use to access the file, and what if any meta data to provide with the response it delivers. We can also choose to provide a way for a human readable filename to be conveyed as part of the URL, rather than base this on the hash or require the downloading user to type it in.

**A Hash URL always begins with `safe:<type>:`** This allows us to continue to permit a normal `safe:` URL to omit or include the conventional but redundant '//' that we are accustomed to in web URLs.

The complete structure of a Hash URL is then:

	`safe::type:hash[:filename]`

Where:

- `type` is one of `file:` or `folder:` or `dns:`. So far I have only discussed retrieving regular files stored with SAFE NFS, but including a type instructs the client on the type of data being retrieved access and how to make use of it, while providing for support to added later for additional types, with backwards compatibility.

- `hash` is the hash address in hexadecimal which resolves to a [FILE](https://github.com/maidsafe/safe_core/blob/eb172c2718aa43b78e644f998cf65a5ff92dfa4b/src/nfs/file.rs#L29) entry.

- `filename` is the URI encoded value of a string that must not include the path separator character '/' (i.e it is a filename without a path, and with an optional file extension).

Examples might be:

	`safe:file:4e1243bd22c66e76c2ba9eddc1f91394e57f9f83:happybeing.png`
	`safe:file:4e1243bd22c66e76c2ba9eddc1f91394e57f9f83:Safecoin-white-paper.pdf`
	`safe:file:4e1243bd22c66e76c2ba9eddc1f91394e57f9f83`


This RFC does not consider the details or use of `folder:` or `dns:` or other types as these can be defined later. For now we only need implement type `file:`

The author believes that this method of addressing SAFE NFS stored files will be feasible according to [RFC0046-new-auth-flow](https://github.com/maidsafe/rfcs/tree/master/text/0046-new-auth-flow) which uses a system of [Containers](https://github.com/maidsafe/rfcs/blob/master/text/0046-new-auth-flow/containers.md#nfs-convention) to emulate filesystem at the NFS level. This though will depend on the decisions taken around implementing emulation NFS and the underlying file structures. 

### Behaviour Options - Discussion

Disregarding any limitations imposed by the implementation, we should in reviewing this RFC consider the viability and usefulness SAFE Hash URLs being either permanent or temporary. Assuming the shared file is immutable, we should be able to guarantee that the URL will also be permanent. If the file were either mutable or deliberately referenced via a mutable data structure, then the URL could be designed to be impermanent. 

**IMPORTANT:** At this point both options are on the table so we can debate what is expected and desirable, but as is stands this RFC proposes to implement only permanent SAFE Hash URLs.

#### Permanent URLs

If all SAFE Hash URL's are valid forever, we have the advantage of certainty, and the feature of permanent access to all files shared in this manner.

It wouldn't ensure that SAFE websites were always available forever and immutable, because generally these utilise ordinary SAFE URLs that map to a mutable file structure, but the advent of *Permanent URLs* would make it *possible* to create a SAFE web app or website that was easy to inspect and verify as permanent and immutable.

The question is whether we would want to limit SAFE Hash URLs to only allow sharing of immutable data, or to allow permanent *and* impermanent URLs (see next). A guarantee of permanence for all SAFE Hash URLs would have to be verifiable (i.e. within safe_core), because it would not be desirable for people to assume that these were permanent and immutable if there was a way of subverting this with a customised SAFE Hash URL maker).

#### Impermanent URLs

There are many good things about permanent URLs, but also the disadvantage for users who accidentally share something that can never subsequently be unshared. There are also things people want to be able to share temporarily. For example, so an intended recipient access them, but later be invalidated to reduce the chance that someone else later obtains the URL and gains access to the file.  Also, what one shares one day, or in one state of mind, might later be regretted and so in certain circumstances it might also be useful to provide a way to generate URLs that can be invalidated. Impermanence is also likely to be expected behaviour, so if it is not, we might need to find ways to make that very clear.

If we allow both permanent and impermanent URLs it would be sensible to indicate this as part of the URL so that users know what they are sharing and receiving. For example, by adding '-p' or '-i' to the end of the `type` as in:

	`safe:file-p:4e1243bd22c66e76c2ba9eddc1f91394e57f9f83:Safecoin-white-paper.pdf`

Impermanent URLs would require a *delete Hash URL* API, which raises a further question as to whether or not we should allow different files to appear at the same address at different times, and if not how this could be prevented.

**IMPORTANT:** For simplicity's sake, this RFC mandates only permanent URLs (and so only type `file:` and never `file-p` or `file-i`), but this assumes we can enforce permanence, and is up for debate.

### SAFE NFS API Changes

Assuming only *permanent SAFE Hash URLs* are supported, SAFE NFS API to be extended with:

	`getPermanentLink(fileName: String) -> Future<String>` 

	`fileName`	- the full path of an existing file in the user's NFS storage

This returns a permanently valid URL for fileName formatted as a SAFE Hash URL including `type`, `hash` and `filename` elements.

If we later support impermanent URLs a suitably named function can be added which would use a type of `file-i` instead of `file`

### safe-js Changes

safe-js to be extended with `safeNFS.getPermanentLink()` which returns a Promise that resolves to a SAFE Hash URL as above.

### SAFE Beaker Changes

SAFE Beaker will detect every SAFE Hash URL, parse it according to the above, and use this information to:

a) access the file on the network
b) provide error handling where retrieving the file fails or times out
c) deliver the content appropriately (e.g. embedded in HTML content, embedded download link, or location bar access) including where provided: applying metadata to assist in rendering embedded content, and supplying a default filename when offering to download. 


## Drawbacks

It relies on the implementation of SAFE NFS storage and might be difficult to maintain if that ever changes.

There might be privacy or tracking issues associated with sharing URLs if they could somehow be linked back to a user or account, though none are immediately apparent, save ill considered naming of files.


## Alternatives

Not doing this would require users to find other ways of sharing files, which since they are not built in to safe_core and SAFE Beaker will be more cumbersome (for users and for app developers) and impossible to ensure permanence, and harder to trust in terms of security (i.e. from tracking and surveillance). Making such a widely used feature harder than necessary would reduce the rate and potential level of adoption, thereby diminishing its positive overall impact on security and privacy.

### Application based or shared DNS

Rather than addressing a file using a hash, we might use either the existing SAFE DNS to share files saved in the user or application managed public storage. SAFE NFS at present would be cumbersome to use for this, requiring every app which wants to generate file URLs to have access to a user's registered public ID and service so this is not practical.

There are changes being considered which may make a DNS based sharing URLs more practical (see [this dev forum post](https://forum.safedev.org/t/file-sharing-at-the-level-of-safe-urls/288/7?u=happybeing) but these have not been decided and have not been considered as part of this RFC. So once clear, it may be worthwhile reviewing this option.


## Unresolved questions

It needs to be confirmed that proposed modifications to the implementation of SAFE NFS [Containers](https://github.com/maidsafe/rfcs/blob/master/text/0046-new-auth-flow/containers.md#nfs-convention) would support this functionality if adopted.